Tell the tale, Goddess, of Cronides’ courier with fiery flame,
the gasping travail which the thunderbolt brought with sparks for wedding-torches,
the lightning in waiting upon Semele’s nuptials;
tell the naissance of Bacchos twice-born,
whom Zeus lifted still moist from the fire,
a baby half-complete born without midwife;
how with shrinking hands he cut the incision in his thigh
and carried him in his man’s womb,
father and gracious mother at once –
and well he remembered another birth,
when his own head conceived,
when his temple was big with child,
and he carried that incredible unbegotten lump,
until he shot out Athena scintillating in her armour.
Midway upon the journey of our life,
I found myself within a forest dark,
For the straightforward pathway had been lost.
Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say
What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,
Which in the very thought renews the fear.
So bitter is it, death is little more;
But of the good to treat, which there I found,
Speak will I of the other things I saw.
I cannot well repeat how there I entered,
So full was I of slumber at the moment
In which I had abandoned the true way.
But after I had reached a mountain's foot,
At that point where the valley terminated,
Which had with consternation pierced my heart.
I looked on high, and saw its shoulders
Mantled already with that planet’s rays
Which leadeth others right by every road.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
To be, or not to be: that is the question.
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them?
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness:
for they shall be filled.
Blessed are the merciful
for they shall obtain mercy.
Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide
After he had sacked the famous town of Troy.
Many cities did he visit, and many were the nations with whose manners and customs
He was acquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life
and bring his men safely home;

